README.md, before:

# PyTaxa

The goal of the project is to provide a Python-based package that is able to retrieve taxonomic information / lineage given a taxonomy ID or NCBI accession number. PyTaxa supports NCBI taxonomy, EBI MGnify lineage, and GTDB taxonomy. Users can also import custom taxonomy and lineages. The taxonomy files generated by [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) (Ondov et. al., 2011) are compatible with PyTaxa. Part of the codes are ported from Krona taxonomy tool written in Perl.

## Installation

Use python setup-tool or pip to install this package:
```
python setup.py install
```
or
```
pip install .
```

## Usage

Use as a python module:

```python
#import taxonomy as module
import pytaxa.taxonomy as t

#load taxonomy info
t.loadTaxonomy()

#convert taxid to name
name = t.taxid2name(tid)
```

or, run as a standalone converter:

```sh
$ pytaxa query -i 2697049
```

## Functionality

One of the following methods needs to be use to loading taxonomy information. Different methods can be used together to expand taxonomy. See [[Taxonomy information files](#taxonomy_info_files)] for supported formats.

- `loadTaxonomy(dbpath=None, cus_taxonomy_file=None, cus_taxonomy_format='tsv', auto_download=True)`
    - This is the main method for taxonomy loading. It will use the other loading methods to load taxonomy depending on input arguments. If there is no local taxonomy, NCBI taxonomy will be downloaded automatically by default.
- `loadTaxonomyTSV(tsv_taxonomy_file=[FILE])`
- `loadNCBITaxonomy(taxdump_tgz_file=[FILE], names_dmp_file, nodes_dmp_file, merged_dmp_file)`
- `loadMgnifyTaxonomy(cus_taxonomy_file)`
- `loadGTDBTaxonomy(gtdb_taxonomy_file, gtdb_taxonomy_format="gtdb_metadata")`

Convert taxonomy id:

- `taxid2rank( [taxID], guess_strain=True )`
    - for example: taxid2rank( 2697049 )
        - return: strain
- `taxid2name( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2name( 2697049 )
        - return: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
- `taxid2type( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2type( 2697049 )
        - return: 0
- `taxid2parent( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2parent( 2697049 )
        - return: 694009
- `taxid2nameOnRank( [taxID], r )`
    - for example: taxid2nameOnRank( 2697049, 'genus')
        - return: Betacoronavirus
- `taxid2taxidOnRank( [taxID], r )`
    - for example: taxid2taxidOnRank( 2697049, 'genus')
        - return: 694002
- `taxidIsLeaf( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxidIsLeaf( 2697049 )
        - return: True
- `taxid2fullLineage( [taxID], sep=["|",";"], use_rank_abbr=False, space2underscore=True)`
    - for example: taxid2fullLineage( 666 )
        - return: no_rank|131567|cellular_organisms|superkingdom|2|Bacteria|phylum|1224|Proteobacteria|class|1236|Gammaproteobacteria|order|135623|Vibrionales|family|641|Vibrionaceae|genus|662|Vibrio|species|666|Vibrio_cholerae
    - for example: taxid2fullLineage( 666, sep=';' )
        - return: no_rank__cellular_organisms;superkingdom__Bacteria;phylum__Proteobacteria;class__Gammaproteobacteria;order__Vibrionales;family__Vibrionaceae;genus__Vibrio;species__Vibrio_cholerae
- `taxid2fullLinkDict( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2fullLinkDict( 666 )
        - return: {'662': '666', '641': '662', '135623': '641', '1236': '135623', '1224': '1236', '2': '1224', '131567': '2', '1': '131567'}
- `taxid2nearestMajorTaxid( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2nearestMajorTaxid( 2697049 )
        - return: 694009
- `taxid2lineage( [taxID], all_major_rank=True, print_strain=True, space2underscore=False, sep=["|",";"])`
    - for example: taxid2lineage( 2697049 )
        - return: Viruses|Pisuviricota|Pisoniviricetes|Nidovirales|Coronaviridae|Betacoronavirus|Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus|Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
    - for example: taxid2lineageTEXT( 2697049, sep=';', print_strain=True )
        - return: sk__Viruses;p__Pisuviricota;c__Pisoniviricetes;o__Nidovirales;f__Coronaviridae;g__Betacoronavirus;s__Severe_acute_respiratory_syndrome-related_coronavirus;n__Severe_acute_respiratory_syndrome_coronavirus_2
- `taxid2lineageDICT( [taxID], all_major_rank=True, print_strain=False, space2underscore=False)`
    - for example: taxid2lineageDICT( 2697049, print_strain=True )
        - return: {'strain': {'name': 'Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2', 'taxid': '2697049'}, 'species': {'name': 'Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus', 'taxid': '694009'}, 'genus': {'name': 'Betacoronavirus', 'taxid': '694002'}, 'family': {'name': 'Coronaviridae', 'taxid': '11118'}, 'order': {'name': 'Nidovirales', 'taxid': '76804'}, 'class': {'name': 'Pisoniviricetes', 'taxid': '2732506'}, 'phylum': {'name': 'Pisuviricota', 'taxid': '2732408'}, 'superkingdom': {'name': 'Viruses', 'taxid': '10239'}}

Convert accession number:

- `acc2taxid( acc )`

Convert taxa to taonxomy id:

- `name2taxid( name )`

## Taxonomy information files <a name="taxonomy_info_files"></a>

PyTaxa takes various taxonomy files. If the path of the taxonomy directory isn't provided, it will use `taxonomy_db/` as the default path and search for following files at the taxonomy directory:

1. NCBI taxonomy dump file (compressed) - `taxdump.tar.gz`:
    - The compressed file `taxdump.tar.gz` can be downloaded from `ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz` directly.

2. NCBI taxonomy dump files (decompressed) - `nodes.dmp`, `names.dmp` and `merged.dmp`(optional):
    - These files can be decompressed from `taxdump.tar.gz`

3. Pre-processed taxonomy information tsv files:
    - See [[Generating taxonomy.tsv](#taxonomy_tsv)] for details
        - taxonomy.tsv
        - taxonomy.custom.tsv (optional; for custom taxonomies)
        - taxonomy.merged.tsv (optional; for merged taxonomic nodes)
    - Example file can be find in `example/taxonomy.custom.tsv`

4. EBI MGnigy lineages:
    - See [[custom taxonomy > lineage format](#lineage_format)] for details
    - Example file can be find in `example/mgnify_lineage.txt`

5. GTDB taxonomy and metadata tsv (plain text only):
    - GTDB taxonomy tar.gz file [[link](https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/latest/bac120_taxonomy.tar.gz)]
    - GTDB metadata tar.gz file [[link](https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/latest/bac120_metadata.tar.gz)]
    - Example file can be find in `example/bac120_*_r207.tsv`

6. (optional) Mapping table of accession number to taxid in TSV format
    - accession2taxid.tsv (requirement for function `acc2taxid()`)


## Pre-processing taxonomy information

Retrieve taxonomy information can be downloaded from NCBI FTP site. In fact, `taxdump.tar.gz` is all we need if not converting accession# to taxid.

```sh
# create database directory
mkdir -p taxonomy_db
cd taxonomy_db
rsync -auvzh --delete rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz taxonomy/
rsync -auvzh --delete rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/accession2taxid taxonomy/

tar -xzf taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz -C taxonomy/
cp taxonomy/names.dmp .
cp taxonomy/nodes.dmp .
cp taxonomy/merged.dmp .

cd taxonomy/accession2taxid/
gzip -dc *nucl*.gz dead_wgs.accession2taxid.gz | cut -f 1,3 | LC_ALL=C sort -T . > ../../accession2taxid.nucl.tsv
ln -s accession2taxid.nucl.tsv accession2taxid.tsv
```

#### Generating taxonomy.tsv <a name="taxonomy_tsv"></a>

You can use `extractTaxonomy.pl` to generate taoxnomy information file `taxonomy.tsv`. The script will compile a merged tsv file from NCBI taxonomy `nodes.dmp` and `names.dmp`.

```sh
tar -xzf ../taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz -C ../taxonomy
../scripts/extractTaxonomy.pl ../taxonomy > taxonomy.tsv
```
The format of taxonomy.tsv (and taxonomy.custom.tsv) :

| Column | Description     | 
|--------|-----------------| 
| 1      | Taxid           | 
| 2      | depth           | 
| 3      | Parent taxid    | 
| 4      | Rank            | 
| 5      | Scientific name | 

#### Generating custom taxonomy

Two formats, `tsv` and `lineage`, can be used to provide cutom taxonomy infomation and being loaded with `loadTaxonomy(cus_taxonomy_file=[PATH], cus_taxonomy_format=[FORMAT])`. There are a couple examples files in the `example/` directory.

##### `tsv` format

The default filename for custom taxonomy in `tsv` format is `taxonomy.custom.tsv`. The `taxonomy.custom.tsv` uses the same format as `taxonomy.tsv` to expand taxonomic nodes. It's optional but recommended to add some pesudo-nodes for viral taxonomy as below:

```sh
bind "set disable-completion on"
/bin/cat <<EOM >taxonomy.custom.tsv
131567	1	1	subroot	cellular organisms
35237	2	10239	phylum	dsDNA viruses, no RNA stage
35325	2	10239	phylum	dsRNA viruses
12333	2	10239	phylum	unclassified phages
12429	2	10239	phylum	unclassified viruses
12877	2	10239	phylum	Satellites
29258	2	10239	phylum	ssDNA viruses
35268	2	10239	phylum	Retro-transcribing viruses
186616	2	10239	phylum	environmental samples
439488	2	10239	phylum	ssRNA viruses
451344	2	10239	phylum	unclassified archaeal viruses
552364	2	10239	phylum	unclassified virophages
686617	2	10239	phylum	unassigned viruses
1425366	2	10239	phylum	Virus-associated RNAs
1714266	2	10239	phylum	Virus families not assigned to an order
EOM
bind "set disable-completion off"
```

##### `lineage` format <a name="lineage_format"></a>

The `lineage` format provided the full lineage of a taxa in one linear. The node info in a lineage uses `[rank]__[name];` to provide node infomation. For example:

```
sk__Bacteria;p__Bacteroidetes;c__Bacteroidia;o__Bacteroidales;f__Prevotellaceae;g__Massiliprevotella;s__Massiliprevotella_massiliensis
```

PyTaxa will automatically convert following abbreviations to the full name of rank. These ranks are defined as major ranks but PyTaxa allows all ranks inclusing user defined ranks. Note that major ranks can be modified -- see [[here]](#levels_and_abbr)] for details.

| Abbr   | Ranks           | 
|--------|-----------------| 
|  'sk'  |  'superkingdom' |
|  'p'   |  'phylum'       |
|  'c'   |  'class'        |
|  'o'   |  'order'        |
|  'f'   |  'family'       |
|  'g'   |  'genus'        |
|  's'   |  'species'      |
|  'n'   |  'strain'       |

#### Generating taxonomy.merged.tsv

```sh
perl -pe 's/\s+\|//g' ../taxonomy/merged.dmp > taxonomy.merged.tsv
```

#### Generating `accession2taxid.tsv`

```sh
zcat ../taxonomy/accession2taxid/*nucl*.gz | cut -f 2,3 | sed 's/\.[[:digit:]]*//' | LC_ALL=C sort > accession2taxid.nucl.tsv
ln -s accession2taxid.nucl.tsv accession2taxid.tsv
```

## Customizing major levels and abbreviations <a name="levels_and_abbr"></a>

The default major ranks and their abbreviations are defined in JSON format `taxonomy_db/major_level_to_abbr.json`. User can make their own modification or add their own rank-abbreviation pairs.

Commit message:

add rank criteria and partial match to name2tid search

README.md, after:

# PyTaxa

The goal of the project is to provide a Python-based package that is able to retrieve taxonomic information / lineage given a taxonomy ID or NCBI accession number. PyTaxa supports NCBI taxonomy, EBI MGnify lineage, and GTDB taxonomy. Users can also import custom taxonomy and lineages. The taxonomy files generated by [Krona](https://github.com/marbl/Krona) (Ondov et. al., 2011) are compatible with PyTaxa. Part of the codes are ported from Krona taxonomy tool written in Perl.

## Installation

Use python setup-tool or pip to install this package:
```
python setup.py install
```
or
```
pip install .
```

## Usage

Use as a python module:

```python
#import taxonomy as module
import pytaxa.taxonomy as t

#load taxonomy info
t.loadTaxonomy()

#convert taxid to name
name = t.taxid2name(tid)
```

or, run as a standalone converter:

```sh
$ pytaxa query -i 2697049
```

## Functionality

One of the following methods needs to be use to loading taxonomy information. Different methods can be used together to expand taxonomy. See [[Taxonomy information files](#taxonomy_info_files)] for supported formats.

- `loadTaxonomy(dbpath=None, cus_taxonomy_file=None, cus_taxonomy_format='tsv', auto_download=True)`
    - This is the main method for taxonomy loading. It will use the other loading methods to load taxonomy depending on input arguments. If there is no local taxonomy, NCBI taxonomy will be downloaded automatically by default.
- `loadTaxonomyTSV(tsv_taxonomy_file=[FILE])`
- `loadNCBITaxonomy(taxdump_tgz_file=[FILE], names_dmp_file, nodes_dmp_file, merged_dmp_file)`
- `loadMgnifyTaxonomy(cus_taxonomy_file)`
- `loadGTDBTaxonomy(gtdb_taxonomy_file, gtdb_taxonomy_format="gtdb_metadata")`

Convert taxonomy id:

- `taxid2rank( [taxID], guess_strain=True )`
    - for example: taxid2rank( 2697049 )
        - return: strain
- `taxid2name( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2name( 2697049 )
        - return: Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
- `taxid2type( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2type( 2697049 )
        - return: 0
- `taxid2parent( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2parent( 2697049 )
        - return: 694009
- `taxid2nameOnRank( [taxID], r )`
    - for example: taxid2nameOnRank( 2697049, 'genus')
        - return: Betacoronavirus
- `taxid2taxidOnRank( [taxID], r )`
    - for example: taxid2taxidOnRank( 2697049, 'genus')
        - return: 694002
- `taxidIsLeaf( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxidIsLeaf( 2697049 )
        - return: True
- `taxid2fullLineage( [taxID], sep=["|",";"], use_rank_abbr=False, space2underscore=True)`
    - for example: taxid2fullLineage( 666 )
        - return: no_rank|131567|cellular_organisms|superkingdom|2|Bacteria|phylum|1224|Proteobacteria|class|1236|Gammaproteobacteria|order|135623|Vibrionales|family|641|Vibrionaceae|genus|662|Vibrio|species|666|Vibrio_cholerae
    - for example: taxid2fullLineage( 666, sep=';' )
        - return: no_rank__cellular_organisms;superkingdom__Bacteria;phylum__Proteobacteria;class__Gammaproteobacteria;order__Vibrionales;family__Vibrionaceae;genus__Vibrio;species__Vibrio_cholerae
- `taxid2fullLinkDict( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2fullLinkDict( 666 )
        - return: {'662': '666', '641': '662', '135623': '641', '1236': '135623', '1224': '1236', '2': '1224', '131567': '2', '1': '131567'}
- `taxid2nearestMajorTaxid( [taxID] )`
    - for example: taxid2nearestMajorTaxid( 2697049 )
        - return: 694009
- `taxid2lineage( [taxID], all_major_rank=True, print_strain=True, space2underscore=False, sep=["|",";"])`
    - for example: taxid2lineage( 2697049 )
        - return: Viruses|Pisuviricota|Pisoniviricetes|Nidovirales|Coronaviridae|Betacoronavirus|Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus|Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2
    - for example: taxid2lineageTEXT( 2697049, sep=';', print_strain=True )
        - return: sk__Viruses;p__Pisuviricota;c__Pisoniviricetes;o__Nidovirales;f__Coronaviridae;g__Betacoronavirus;s__Severe_acute_respiratory_syndrome-related_coronavirus;n__Severe_acute_respiratory_syndrome_coronavirus_2
- `taxid2lineageDICT( [taxID], all_major_rank=True, print_strain=False, space2underscore=False)`
    - for example: taxid2lineageDICT( 2697049, print_strain=True )
        - return: {'strain': {'name': 'Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2', 'taxid': '2697049'}, 'species': {'name': 'Severe acute respiratory syndrome-related coronavirus', 'taxid': '694009'}, 'genus': {'name': 'Betacoronavirus', 'taxid': '694002'}, 'family': {'name': 'Coronaviridae', 'taxid': '11118'}, 'order': {'name': 'Nidovirales', 'taxid': '76804'}, 'class': {'name': 'Pisoniviricetes', 'taxid': '2732506'}, 'phylum': {'name': 'Pisuviricota', 'taxid': '2732408'}, 'superkingdom': {'name': 'Viruses', 'taxid': '10239'}}

Convert accession number:

- `acc2taxid( acc )`

Convert taxa to taonxomy id:

- `name2taxid( name, rank=None, partial_match=False )`

## Taxonomy information files <a name="taxonomy_info_files"></a>

PyTaxa takes various taxonomy files. If the path of the taxonomy directory isn't provided, it will use `taxonomy_db/` as the default path and search for following files at the taxonomy directory:

1. NCBI taxonomy dump file (compressed) - `taxdump.tar.gz`:
    - The compressed file `taxdump.tar.gz` can be downloaded from `ftp://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz` directly.

2. NCBI taxonomy dump files (decompressed) - `nodes.dmp`, `names.dmp` and `merged.dmp`(optional):
    - These files can be decompressed from `taxdump.tar.gz`

3. Pre-processed taxonomy information tsv files:
    - See [[Generating taxonomy.tsv](#taxonomy_tsv)] for details
        - taxonomy.tsv
        - taxonomy.custom.tsv (optional; for custom taxonomies)
        - taxonomy.merged.tsv (optional; for merged taxonomic nodes)
    - Example file can be find in `example/taxonomy.custom.tsv`

4. EBI MGnigy lineages:
    - See [[custom taxonomy > lineage format](#lineage_format)] for details
    - Example file can be find in `example/mgnify_lineage.txt`

5. GTDB taxonomy and metadata tsv (plain text only):
    - GTDB taxonomy tar.gz file [[link](https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/latest/bac120_taxonomy.tar.gz)]
    - GTDB metadata tar.gz file [[link](https://data.gtdb.ecogenomic.org/releases/latest/bac120_metadata.tar.gz)]
    - Example file can be find in `example/bac120_*_r207.tsv`

6. (optional) Mapping table of accession number to taxid in TSV format
    - accession2taxid.tsv (requirement for function `acc2taxid()`)


## Pre-processing taxonomy information

Retrieve taxonomy information can be downloaded from NCBI FTP site. In fact, `taxdump.tar.gz` is all we need if not converting accession# to taxid.

```sh
# create database directory
mkdir -p taxonomy_db
cd taxonomy_db
rsync -auvzh --delete rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz taxonomy/
rsync -auvzh --delete rsync://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pub/taxonomy/accession2taxid taxonomy/

tar -xzf taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz -C taxonomy/
cp taxonomy/names.dmp .
cp taxonomy/nodes.dmp .
cp taxonomy/merged.dmp .

cd taxonomy/accession2taxid/
gzip -dc *nucl*.gz dead_wgs.accession2taxid.gz | cut -f 1,3 | LC_ALL=C sort -T . > ../../accession2taxid.nucl.tsv
ln -s accession2taxid.nucl.tsv accession2taxid.tsv
```

#### Generating taxonomy.tsv <a name="taxonomy_tsv"></a>

You can use `extractTaxonomy.pl` to generate taoxnomy information file `taxonomy.tsv`. The script will compile a merged tsv file from NCBI taxonomy `nodes.dmp` and `names.dmp`.

```sh
tar -xzf ../taxonomy/taxdump.tar.gz -C ../taxonomy
../scripts/extractTaxonomy.pl ../taxonomy > taxonomy.tsv
```
The format of taxonomy.tsv (and taxonomy.custom.tsv) :

| Column | Description     | 
|--------|-----------------| 
| 1      | Taxid           | 
| 2      | depth           | 
| 3      | Parent taxid    | 
| 4      | Rank            | 
| 5      | Scientific name | 

#### Generating custom taxonomy

Two formats, `tsv` and `lineage`, can be used to provide cutom taxonomy infomation and being loaded with `loadTaxonomy(cus_taxonomy_file=[PATH], cus_taxonomy_format=[FORMAT])`. There are a couple examples files in the `example/` directory.

##### `tsv` format

The default filename for custom taxonomy in `tsv` format is `taxonomy.custom.tsv`. The `taxonomy.custom.tsv` uses the same format as `taxonomy.tsv` to expand taxonomic nodes. It's optional but recommended to add some pesudo-nodes for viral taxonomy as below:

```sh
bind "set disable-completion on"
/bin/cat <<EOM >taxonomy.custom.tsv
131567	1	1	subroot	cellular organisms
35237	2	10239	phylum	dsDNA viruses, no RNA stage
35325	2	10239	phylum	dsRNA viruses
12333	2	10239	phylum	unclassified phages
12429	2	10239	phylum	unclassified viruses
12877	2	10239	phylum	Satellites
29258	2	10239	phylum	ssDNA viruses
35268	2	10239	phylum	Retro-transcribing viruses
186616	2	10239	phylum	environmental samples
439488	2	10239	phylum	ssRNA viruses
451344	2	10239	phylum	unclassified archaeal viruses
552364	2	10239	phylum	unclassified virophages
686617	2	10239	phylum	unassigned viruses
1425366	2	10239	phylum	Virus-associated RNAs
1714266	2	10239	phylum	Virus families not assigned to an order
EOM
bind "set disable-completion off"
```

##### `lineage` format <a name="lineage_format"></a>

The `lineage` format provided the full lineage of a taxa in one linear. The node info in a lineage uses `[rank]__[name];` to provide node infomation. For example:

```
sk__Bacteria;p__Bacteroidetes;c__Bacteroidia;o__Bacteroidales;f__Prevotellaceae;g__Massiliprevotella;s__Massiliprevotella_massiliensis
```

PyTaxa will automatically convert following abbreviations to the full name of rank. These ranks are defined as major ranks but PyTaxa allows all ranks inclusing user defined ranks. Note that major ranks can be modified -- see [[here]](#levels_and_abbr)] for details.

| Abbr   | Ranks           | 
|--------|-----------------| 
|  'sk'  |  'superkingdom' |
|  'p'   |  'phylum'       |
|  'c'   |  'class'        |
|  'o'   |  'order'        |
|  'f'   |  'family'       |
|  'g'   |  'genus'        |
|  's'   |  'species'      |
|  'n'   |  'strain'       |

#### Generating taxonomy.merged.tsv

```sh
perl -pe 's/\s+\|//g' ../taxonomy/merged.dmp > taxonomy.merged.tsv
```

#### Generating `accession2taxid.tsv`

```sh
zcat ../taxonomy/accession2taxid/*nucl*.gz | cut -f 2,3 | sed 's/\.[[:digit:]]*//' | LC_ALL=C sort > accession2taxid.nucl.tsv
ln -s accession2taxid.nucl.tsv accession2taxid.tsv
```

## Customizing major levels and abbreviations <a name="levels_and_abbr"></a>

For additional flexibility, a custom major rank-abbreviations mapping data file can be provided. The default major ranks and their abbreviations are defined in JSON format `taxonomy_db/major_level_to_abbr.json`. User can make their own modification or add their own rank-abbreviation pairs.
